<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li data-se-note-number="1" id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Duke Lodovico was Lodovico Moro, a son of Francesco Sforza, who married Beatrice d’Este. He ruled over Milan from 1494 to 1500, and died in 1510. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="2" id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See <a href="../text/the-man-and-his-works.xhtml#p-1">remark</a> in the <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml">introduction</a> on the word “intrattenere.” <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="3" id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>, King of France, “The Father of the People,” born 1462, died 1515. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="4" id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, King of France, born 1470, died 1498. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="5" id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span> divorced his wife, Jeanne, daughter of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, and married in 1499 Anne of Brittany, widow of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, in order to retain the Duchy of Brittany for the crown. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="6" id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Archbishop of Rouen. He was Georges d’Amboise, created a cardinal by Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>. Born 1460, died 1510. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#note-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="7" id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hiero <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, born about 307 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, died 216 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#note-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="8" id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="it">Le radici e corrispondenze</i>, their roots (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> foundations) and correspondencies or relations with other states⁠—a common meaning of “correspondence” and “correspondency” in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="9" id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Francesco Sforza, born 1401, died 1466. He married Bianca Maria Visconti, a natural daughter of Filippo Visconti, the Duke of Milan, on whose death he procured his own elevation to the duchy. Machiavelli was the accredited agent of the Florentine Republic to Cesare Borgia (1478⁠–⁠1507) during the transactions which led up to the assassinations of the Orsini and Vitelli at Sinigalia, and along with his letters to his chiefs in Florence he has left an account, written ten years before <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Prince</i>, of the proceedings of the duke in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Descritione del modo tenuto dal duca Valentino nello ammazzare Vitellozzo Vitelli</i>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="10" id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sinigalia, 31st December 1502. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="11" id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ramiro de Lorqua. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="12" id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> died of fever, 18th August 1503. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="13" id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Julius <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was Giuliano della Rovere, Cardinal of San Pietro ad Vincula, born 1443, died 1513. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="14" id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>San Giorgio is Raffaello Riario. Ascanio is Ascanio Sforza. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#note-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="15" id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Agathocles the Sicilian, born 361 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, died 289 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#note-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="16" id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burd suggests that this word probably comes near the modern equivalent of Machiavelli’s thought when he speaks of <i xml:lang="it">crudelta</i> than the more obvious “cruelties.” <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#note-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="17" id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nabis, tyrant of Sparta, conquered by the Romans under Flamininus in 195 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>; killed 192 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#note-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="18" id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This event is to be found in Machiavelli’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Florentine History</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#note-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="19" id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> invaded Italy in 1494. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#note-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="20" id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pope Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> was the Cardinal de’ Medici. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#note-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="21" id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“With chalk in hand,” <i xml:lang="it">col gesso</i>. This is one of the bons mots of Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, and refers to the ease with which Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> seized Italy, implying that it was only necessary for him to send his quartermasters to chalk up the billets for his soldiers to conquer the country. Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The History of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span></i>, by Lord Bacon:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“King Charles had conquered the realm of Naples, and lost it again, in a kind of a felicity of a dream. He passed the whole length of Italy without resistance: so that it was true what Pope Alexander was wont to say: That the Frenchmen came into Italy with chalk in their hands, to mark up their lodgings, rather than with swords to fight.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="22" id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Battle of Caravaggio, 15th September 1448. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="23" id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Johanna <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of Naples, the widow of Ladislao, King of Naples. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="24" id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An English knight whose name was Sir John Hawkwood. He fought in the English wars in France, and was knighted by Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>; afterwards he collected a body of troops and went into Italy. These became the famous “White Company.” He took part in many wars, and died in Florence in 1394. He was born about 1320 at Sible Hedingham, a village in Essex. He married Domnia, a daughter of Bernabo Visconti. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="25" id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Francesco Bussone, born at Carmagnola about 1390, executed at Venice, 5th May 1432. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="26" id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bartolomeo Colleoni of Bergamo; died 1457. Roberto of San Severino; died fighting for Venice against Sigismund, Duke of Austria, in 1487. <q>“<span xml:lang="it">Primo capitano in Italia</span>.”</q> <cite>—Machiavelli</cite>. Count of Pitigliano; Niccolò Orsini, born 1442, died 1510. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="27" id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Battle of Vaila in 1509. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="28" id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alberico da Barbiano, Count of Cunio in Romagna. He was the leader of the famous “Company of <abbr>St.</abbr> George,” composed entirely of Italian soldiers. He died in 1409. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#note-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="29" id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ferdinand <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> (F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of Aragon and Sicily, F. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> of Naples), surnamed “The Catholic,” born 1542, died 1516. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="30" id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Joannes Cantacuzenus, born 1300, died 1383. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="31" id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> of France, surnamed “The Victorious,” born 1403, died 1461. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="32" id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, son of the above, born 1423, died 1483. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="33" id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Many speakers to the House the other night in the debate on the reduction of armaments seemed to show a most lamentable ignorance of the conditions under which the British Empire maintains its existence. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Balfour replied to the allegations that the Roman Empire sank under the weight of its military obligations, he said that this was ‘wholly unhistorical.’ He might well have added that the Roman power was at its zenith when every citizen acknowledged his liability to fight for the State, but that it began to decline as soon as this obligation was no longer recognized.”</p>
						<cite>—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Pall Mall Gazette</i>, 15th May 1906.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#note-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="34" id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philopoemen, “the last of the Greeks,” born 252 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>, died 183 <abbr class="era">BC</abbr>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#note-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="35" id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>During the rioting between the Cancellieri and Panciatichi factions in 1502 and 1503. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#note-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="36" id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>… against my will, my fate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A throne unsettled, and an infant state,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Bid me defend my realms with all my pow’rs,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And guard with these severities my shores.</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Christopher Pitt.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#note-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="37" id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The present chapter has given greater offence than any other portion of Machiavelli’s writings.”</p>
						<cite>Burd, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Il Principe</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 297.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#note-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="38" id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Contesting,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> “striving for mastery.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burd points out that this passage is imitated directly from Cicero’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">De Officiis</i>: <q>“<span xml:lang="la">Nam cum sint duo genera decertandi, unum per disceptationem, alterum per vim; cumque illud proprium sit hominis, hoc beluarum; confugiendum est ad posterius, si uti non licet superiore.</span>”</q> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#note-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="39" id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“<span xml:lang="la">Nondimanco sempre gli succederono gli inganni (ad votum).</span>” The words <i xml:lang="la">ad votum</i> are omitted in the Testina addition, 1550.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>Alexander never did what he said,<br/>
						Cesare never said what he did.</p>
						<cite>Italian Proverb.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#note-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="40" id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Contrary to fidelity” or “faith,” <i xml:lang="it">contro alla fede</i>, and <i xml:lang="it">tutto fede</i>, “altogether faithful,” in the next paragraph. It is noteworthy that these two phrases, “<span xml:lang="it">contro alla fede</span>” and “<span xml:lang="it">tutto fede</span>,” were omitted in the Testina edition, which was published with the sanction of the papal authorities. It may be that the meaning attached to the word <i xml:lang="it">fede</i> was “the faith,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> the Catholic creed, and not as rendered here “fidelity” and “faithful.” Observe that the word <i xml:lang="it">religione</i> was suffered to stand in the text of the Testina, being used to signify indifferently every shade of belief, as witness “the religion,” a phrase inevitably employed to designate the Huguenot heresy. <cite>South in his Sermon <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 69, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1843</cite>, comments on this passage as follows: <q>“That great patron and Coryphaeus of this tribe, Niccolò Machiavel, laid down this for a master rule in his political scheme: ‘That the show of religion was helpful to the politician, but the reality of it hurtful and pernicious.’ ”</q> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#note-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="41" id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ferdinand of Aragon. <q>“When Machiavelli was writing <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Prince</i> it would have been clearly impossible to mention Ferdinand’s name here without giving offence.”</q> <cite>Burd’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Il Principe</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 308.</cite> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#note-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="42" id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Giovanni Bentivogli, born in Bologna 1438, died at Milan 1508. He ruled Bologna from 1462 to 1506. Machiavelli’s strong condemnation of conspiracies may get its edge from his own very recent experience (February 1513), when he had been arrested and tortured for his alleged complicity in the Boscoli conspiracy. <a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#note-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="43" id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Catherine Sforza, a daughter of Galeazzo Sforza and Lucrezia Landriani, born 1463, died 1509. It was to the Countess of Forli that Machiavelli was sent as envy on 1499. A letter from Fortunati to the countess announces the appointment: <q>“I have been with the signori,” wrote Fortunati, “to learn whom they would send and when. They tell me that Niccolò Machiavelli, a learned young Florentine noble, secretary to my Lords of the Ten, is to leave with me at once.”</q> <cite>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Catherine Sforza</i>, by Count Pasolini, translated by <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Sylvester, 1898.</cite> <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#note-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="44" id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Guilds or societies,” <i xml:lang="it">in arti o in tribu</i>. <i xml:lang="it">Arti</i> were craft or trade guilds, cf. Florio: <q>“Arte … a whole company of any trade in any city or corporation town.”</q> The guilds of Florence are most admirably described by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edgcumbe Staley in his work on the subject (<cite>Methuen, 1906</cite>). Institutions of a somewhat similar character, called <i>artel</i>, exist in Russia today, cf. Sir Mackenzie Wallace’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Russia</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1905: <q>“The sons … were always during the working season members of an artel. In some of the larger towns there are artels of a much more complex kind⁠—permanent associations, possessing large capital, and pecuniarily responsible for the acts of the individual members.”</q> The word “artel,” despite its apparent similarity, has, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Aylmer Maude assures me, no connection with <i xml:lang="la">ars</i> or <i xml:lang="it">arte</i>. Its root is that of the verb <i>rotisya</i>, to bind oneself by an oath; and it is generally admitted to be only another form of <i>rota</i>, which now signifies a “regimental company.” In both words the underlying idea is that of a body of men united by an oath. <i xml:lang="it">Tribu</i> were possibly gentile groups, united by common descent, and included individuals connected by marriage. Perhaps our words “sects” or “clans” would be most appropriate. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#note-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="45" id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Maximilian <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, born in 1459, died 1519, Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire. He married, first, Mary, daughter of Charles the Bold; after her death, Bianca Sforza; and thus became involved in Italian politics. <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#note-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="46" id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frederick the Great was accustomed to say: <q>“The older one gets the more convinced one becomes that his Majesty King Chance does three-quarters of the business of this miserable universe.”</q> <cite>Sorel’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eastern Question</i>.</cite> <a href="../text/chapter-25.xhtml#note-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="47" id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Giuliano de Medici. He had just been created a cardinal by Leo <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>. In 1523 Giuliano was elected Pope, and took the title of Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#note-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="48" id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The battles of Il Taro, 1495; Alessandria, 1499; Capua, 1501; Genoa, 1507; Vaila, 1509; Bologna, 1511; Mestri, 1513. <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#note-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
